Flaminius, honest Flaminius;
you are very respectively welcome, sir.
And how does that honorable, complete,
free-hearted gentleman of Athens,
thy very bountiful good lord and master?
His health is well sir.
I am right glad that his health is well, sir.
And what hast thou there under thy cloak, pretty Flaminius?
'Faith, nothing but an empty box, sir;
Which, in my lord's behalf,
I come to entreat Your Honor to supply;
who, having great and instant occasion to use fifty talents,
hath sent to Your Lordship to furnish him,
nothing doubting your present assistance therein.
La, la!
La, la, la!
"Nothing doubting," says he?
Alas, good lord!
A noble gentleman 'tis,
if he would not keep so good a house.
Many a time and often I have dined with him,
and told him on it, and come again to supper to him,
of purpose to have him spend less,
and yet he would embrace no counsel,
take no warning by my coming.
Every man has his fault, and honesty is his.
I had told him on it,
but I could ne'er get him from it.
Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise.
Your Lordship speaks your pleasure.
I have observed thee always for a towardly prompt spirit
give thee thy due
and one that knows what belongs to reason;
and canst use the time well, if the time use thee well.
Good parts in thee.
Draw nearer, honest Flaminius.
Thy lord's a bountiful gentleman.
But thou art wise;
and thou knowest well enough, although thou comest to me,
that this is no time to lend money,
especially upon bare friendship, without security.
Here's three solidares for thee.
Good boy, wink at me, and say thou sawest me not.
Fare thee well.
Is it possible the world should so much differ,
and we alive that lived?
Fly, damned baseness, to him that worships thee!
Ha!
Now I see thou art a fool and fit for thy master.
May these add to the number that may scald thee!
Let molten coin be thy damnation,
thou disease of a friend, and not himself!
Has friendship such a faint and milky heart,
it turns in less than two nights?
Oh, you gods, I feel master's passion!
This slave, unto his honor, has my lord's meat in him.
Why should it thrive and turn to nutriment,
when he is turned to poison?
Oh, may diseases only work upon it!
And when he's sick to death, let not that part of nature
which my lord paid for
be of any power to expel sickness,
but prolong his hour!
Servilius!
You are kindly met, sir.
Commend me to thy honorable virtuous lord,
my very exquisite friend.
May it please Your Honor, my lord hath sent
Ha! What has he sent?
I am so much endeared to that lord;
he's ever sending.
How shall I thank him, thinkest thou?
And what has he sent now?
Has only sent his present occasion now, my lord;
requesting Your Lordship to supply his instant use
with so many talents.
I know His Lordship is but merry with me;
he cannot want 5,500 talents.
But in the meantime, he wants less, my lord.
If his occasion were not virtuous,
I should not urge it half so faithfully.
Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius?
Upon my soul, 'tis true, sir.
What a wicked beast was I to disfurnish myself
against such a good time,
when I might have shown myself honorable.
How unluckily it happened, that I should purchase
the day before for a little part
and undo a great deal of honor.
Servilius, now, before the gods, I am not able to do
the more beast, I say.
I was sending to use Lord Timon myself,
But I would not for the wealth of Athens I had done it now.
Commend me bountifully to His good Lordship;
and I hope His Honor will conceive the fairest of me,
because I have no power to be kind.
And tell him this from me,
I count it one of my greatest afflictions, say,
that I cannot pleasure such an honorable gentleman.
Good Servilius, will you befriend me so far
as to use mine own words to him?
Yes, sir, I shall.
I'll look you out a good turn,
Servilius.
Must he needs trouble me in it, hmm,
above all others?
He might have tried Lord Lucius or Lucullus;
and now Ventidius is wealthy too,
whom he redeemed from prison.
all these owe their estates unto him.
My lord, they've all been touched and found base metal,
for they have all denied him.
How!
Have they denied him?
Has Ventidius and Lucullus denied him?
And does he send to me?
Three?
Hum!
It shows but little love or judgment in him.
Must I be his last refuge?
His friends, like physicians, thrice give him over.
Must I take the cure upon me?
Has much disgraced me in it;
I'm angry at him, that might have known my place.
I see no sense for it,
but his occasions might have wooed me first;
for, in my conscience, I was the first man
that e'er received gift from him.
And does he think so backwardly of me now
that I'll requite it last?
No.
So it may prove an argument of laughter to the rest,
and I amongst the lords be thought a fool.
I'd rather than the worth of thrice the sum
had sent to me first, but for my mind's sake;
I'd such a courage to do him good.
But now return, and with their faint reply this answer join:
who bates mine honor shall not know my coin.
One of Lord Timon's men.
Flaminius!
Sir, a word.
Pray, is my lord ready to come forth?
No, indeed, he is not.
We attend His Lordship;
pray, signify so much.
I need not tell him that!
He knows you are too diligent.
Is not that his steward muffled so?
He goes away in a cloud.
Call him.
Ho! Do you hear, sir?
By your leave, sir,
What do ye ask of me, my friend?
We wait for certain money here, sir.
Ay, if money were as certain as your waiting,
'twere sure enough.
Why then preferred you not your sums and bills,
when your false masters eat of my lord's meat?
Then they could smile and fawn upon his debts
and take down the interest into their gluttonous maws.
You do yourselves but wrong to stir me up.
Let me pass quietly.
Believe it, my lord and I have made an end;
I have no more to reckon, he to spend.
Ay, but this answer will not serve.
If 'twill not serve, 'tis not so base as you;
For you serve knaves.
How, what does his cashiered worship mutter?
No matter what; he's poor, and that's revenge enough.
Here comes Servilius;
now we shall know some answer.
If I might beseech you, gentlemen,
to repair some other hour,
I should derive much from it;
for take it of my soul,
my lord leans wondrously to discontent.
His comfortable temper has forsook him;
he's much out of health and keeps his chamber.
Many who keep their chambers are not sick.
And if it be so far beyond his health,
methinks he should the sooner pay his debts
and make a clear way to the gods.
We cannot take this for answer, sir.
Aah!
Are my doors opposed against my passage?
Have I been ever free,
and must my house now be my retentive enemy, my jail?
The place which I have feasted, does it now, like all mankind,
show me an iron heart?
My lord, here is my bill.
Here's mine.
And mine, my lord.
Knock me down with 'em.
Cleave me to the girdle.
Alas, my lord
Cut my heart in sums.
Mine, fifty talents.
Tell out my blood!
Five thousand crowns, my lord.
Five thousand drops pays that.
What's yours?
Alas, my lord
The gods fall upon you!
They have even put my breath from me, the slaves.
Creditors?
Devils!
My dear lord
What if it should be so?
My lord
I'll have it so.
My steward!
Here, my lord.
So fitly?
Go, bid all my friends again,
Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius.
All.
I'll once more feast the rascals.
O my lord, you only speak from your distracted soul;
there is not so much left to furnish out a moderate table.
Be it not in thy care.
Go, I charge thee, invite them all.
Let in the tide of knaves once more;
my cook and I'll provide.
My lord, you have my voice to it;
the fault's Bloody;
'tis necessary he should die.
Nothing emboldens sin so much as mercy.
Most true.
The law shall bruise him.
Honor, health, and compassion to the senate.
Now, Captain?
I am an humble suitor to your virtues;
for pity is the virtue of the law,
and none but tyrants use it cruelly.
It pleases time and fortune to lie heavy
upon a friend of mine, who, in hot blood,
hath stepped into the law,
which is past depth to those that, without heed,
do plunge into it.
He is a man, setting his fate aside, of comely virtues.
Nor did he soil the fact with cowardice
an honor in him which buys out his fault
but with a noble fury and fair spirit,
seeing his reputation touched to death,
he did oppose his foe.
And with such sober and unnoted passion,
he did behoove his anger,
ere 'twas spent,
as if he had but proved an argument.
You undergo too strict a paradox,
striving to make an ugly deed look fair.
Your words have took such pains
as if they labored to bring manslaughter into form
and set quarrelling upon the head of valor;
which indeed is valor misbegot and came into the world
when sects and factions were newly born.
He's truly valiant that can wisely suffer
the worst that man can breathe
and make his wrongs his outsides,
to wear them like his raiment, carelessly,
and ne'er prefer his injuries to his heart,
to bring it into danger.
If wrongs be evils and enforce us kill,
what folly 'tis to hazard life for ill!
My lord
You cannot make gross sins look clear.
My lord!
To revenge is no valor, but to bear.
My lords, then, under favor,
pardon me, if I speak like a captain.
Why do fond men expose themselves to battle,
and not endure all threats?
Sleep upon it, and let the foes quietly cut their throats,
without repugnancy?
If there be such valor in the bearing,
what make we abroad?
Why then, women are more valiant that stay at home,
if bearing carry it,
and the ass more captain than the lion,
the fellow loaden with irons wiser than the judge,
if wisdom be in suffering.
O my lords, as you are great, be pitifully good.
Who cannot condemn rashness in cold blood?
To kill, I grant, is sin's extremest gust;
but, in defence, by mercy, 'tis most just.
To be in anger is impiety;
but who is man that is not angry?
Weigh but the crime with this.
You breathe in vain.
In vain!
His service done at Lacedaemon and Byzantium
were a sufficient briber for his life.
What's that?
I say, my lords, he has done fair service,
and slain in fight many of your enemies.
How full of valor did he bear himself in the last conflict,
and made plenteous wounds!
He has made too much plenty with 'em;
he's a sworn rioter.
He has a sin that often drowns him
and takes his valor prisoner.
If there were no foes,
that were enough to overcome him.
In the beastly fury, he has been known to commit outrages
and cherish factions.
It is inferred to us
that his days are foul and his drink dangerous.
He dies.
Hard fate!
He might have died in war.
My lords, if not for any parts in him
though his right arm might purchase his own time
and be in debt to none
yet more to move you,
take my deserts to his, and join 'em both.
And, for I know your reverend ages love security,
I'll pawn my victories, all my honors to you,
upon his good returns.
If, by this crime, he owes the law his life,
why, let the war receive it in valiant gore
for law is strict, and war is nothing more.
We are for law.
He dies.
Urge it no more, on height of our displeasure.
Friend or brother,
he forfeits his own blood that spills another.
Must it be so?
It must not be.
My lords, I do beseech you, know me.
How!
Call me to your remembrances.
What!
I cannot think but that your age has forgot me;
it could not else be, I should prove so base, to sue,
and be denied such common grace.
My wounds ache at you.
Do you dare our anger?
'Tis in few words, but spacious in effect;
we banish thee forever.
Banish me!
Banish your dotage;
banish usury, that makes the senate ugly.
If, after two days' shine, Athens contain thee,
attend our weightier judgment.
And, not to swell our spirit, he shall be executed presently.
Now the gods keep you old enough;
that you may live only in bone, that none may look on you!
I'm worse than mad.
I have kept back their foes,
while they have told their money
and let out their coin upon large interest,
I myself rich only in large hurts.
All those for this?
Is this the balsam that the usuring senate
pours into captains' wounds?
Banishment.
It comes not ill;
I hate not to be banished;
it is a cause worthy my spleen and fury
that I may strike at Athens.
I'll cheer up my discontented troops
and lay for hearts.
'Tis honor with most lands to be at odds;
soldiers should brook as little wrongs as gods.
The good time of day to you, sir.
I also wish it to you.
I think this honorable lord did but try us this other day.
Upon that were my thoughts tiring,
when we encountered.
I hope it is not so low with him
as he made it seem in the trial of his several friends.
It should not be,
by the persuasion of his new feasting.
I should think so.
He hath sent me an earnest inviting,
which many my near occasions did urge me to put off;
but he hath conjured me beyond them,
and I must needs appear.
In like manner was I in debt to my importunate business,
but he would not hear my excuse.
I am sorry, when he sent to borrow of me,
that my provision was out.
I am sick of that grief too,
as I understand how all things go.
Every man here's so.
What would he have borrowed of you?
A thousand pieces.
He sent to me, sir
Here he comes.
With all my heart, gentlemen both.
How fare you?
Ever at the best, hearing well of Your Lordship.
The swallow follows not summer
more willing than we, Your Lordship.
Nor more willingly leaves winter;
such summer-birds are men.
Our dinner will not recompense this long stay.
Feast your ears with the music awhile,
if they will fare so harshly of the trumpet's sound;
we will to it presently.
I hope it remains not unkindly with Your Lordship
that I returned you an empty messenger.
O, sir, let it not trouble you.
My noble lord
My good friend, what cheer?
My most honorable lord, I am even sick of shame that,
when this other day Your Lordship sent to me,
I was so unfortunate a beggar.
Think not on it.
If you had sent but two hours before
Let it not cumber your better remembrance.
Come, bring in all together.
All covered dishes.
Royal cheer, I warrant you.
I doubt not that,
if money and the season can yield it.
How do you?
What's the news?
Alcibiades is banished.
Hear you of it?
Alcibiades banished.
'Tis so; be sure of it.
How, how?
I pray you, upon what?
My worthy friends, will you draw near?
I'll tell you more anon.
Here's a noble feast toward.
This is the old man still.
Will it do? Will it do?
It does.
But time will, and so
I do conceive.
Each man to his stool, with that spur as he would
to the lip of his mistress.
Your diet shall be in all places alike.
Make not a city feast of it, to let the meat cool
ere we can agree upon the first place.
Sit, sit.
The gods require our thanks.
You great benefactors,
sprinkle our society with thankfulness.
For your own gifts, let yourselves be praised.
But reserve still to give, lest your deities be despised.
Lend to each man enough,
that one need not lend to another;
for, were your godheads to borrow of men,
men would forsake the gods.
Let the meat be beloved
more than the man that gives it.
Let no assembly of twenty be without a score of villains.
if there sit twelve women at the table,
let a dozen of them be as they are.
The rest of your fees, you gods
the senators of Athens,
together with the common lag of people
what is amiss in them,
you gods, make suitable for destruction.
For these, my present friends, as they are nothing to me,
so in nothing bless them,
and to nothing are they welcome.
Uncover, dogs, and lap.
What does His Lordship mean?
I know not.
May you a better feast never behold,
you knot of mouth-friends.
Smoke and lukewarm water is your perfection.
This is Timon's last;
who, stuck and spangled with your flatteries,
washes it off, and sprinkles in your faces
your reeking villainy.
Live loathed and long,
most smiling, smooth, detested parasites,
courteous destroyers, affable wolves, meek bears,
you fools of fortune, trencher-friends,
cap and knee slaves, vapors, minute-jacks!
Of man and beast the infinite malady crust you quite o'er!
What, dost thou go?
All in motion soft!
Take thy physic first thou too
and thou
Stay, I'll lend thee money, borrow none.
Henceforth be no feast,
whereat a villain's not a welcome guest.
Burn, house!
Sink, Athens!
Henceforth hated be of Timon
man and all humanity!
Matrons, turn incontinent!
Obedience, fail in children!
Slaves and fools,
pluck the grave wrinkled senate from the bench,
and minister in their steads!
To general filths convert of the instant,
green virginity, do it in your parents' eyes!
Bankrupts, hold fast;
rather than render back, out with your knives,
and cut your trusters' throats!
Bound servants, steal!
Large-handed robbers your grave masters are,
and pill by law.
Maid, to thy master's bed;
thy mistress is of the brothel!
Son of sixteen, pluck the lined crutch
from thy old limping sire, with it, beat out his brains!
Piety and fear, religion to the gods,
peace, justice, truth, domestic awe, night-rest,
neighborhood, instruction, manners,
mysteries, trades,
decline to your confounding contraries,
and let confusion live!
Plagues, incident to men,
your potent and infectious fevers heap on Athens,
ripe for stroke!
Thou cold sciatica, cripple our senators,
that their limbs may halt as lamely as their manners.
Lust and liberty creep into the minds and marrows of our youth,
that 'gainst the stream of virtue they may strive,
and drown themselves in riot!
Itches, blains, sow all the Athenian bosoms;
and their crop be general leprosy!
Breath infect breath, that their society,
as their friendship, may be merely poisoned!
Nothing I'll bear from thee but nakedness,
thou detestable town!
Take thou that with multiplying bans!
The gods confound
hear me, you good gods all
the Athenians both within and out that wall!
And grant, as Timon grows, his hate may grow
to the whole race of mankind, high and low!
Amen.
Hear you!
Master steward?
Where's our master?
Are we undone?
Cast off? Nothing remaining?
Alack, my fellows, what should I say to you?
Let me be recorded by the righteous gods,
I am as poor as you.
Such a house broke?
So noble a master fallen?
All gone, and not one friend to take his fortune by the arm,
and go along with him?
As we do turn our back from our companion
thrown into his grave,
so his familiars to his buried fortunes
slink all away,
leave their false vows in him,
like empty purses picked;
and his poor self, a dedicated beggar to the air,
with his disease of all-shunned poverty,
walks, like contempt, alone.
More of our fellows.
All broken implements of a ruined house.
Yet do our hearts wear Timon's livery;
that see I by our faces;
we are fellows still, serving alike in sorrow.
Leaked is our bark, and we, poor mates,
stand on the dying deck, hearing the surges threat.
We must all part into this sea of air.
Good fellows all, the latest of my wealth
I'll share amongst you.
Wherever we shall meet, for Timon's sake,
let's yet be fellows;
let's shake our heads and say,
as 'twere a knell unto our master's fortune,
"We have seen better days."
Let each take some;
nay, put out all your hands.
Not one word more.
Thus part we rich in sorrow, parting poor.
Oh, the fierce wretchedness that glory brings us.
Who would not wish to be from wealth exempt,
since riches point to misery and contempt?
Who would be so mocked with glory?
Or to live but in a dream of friendship?
To have his pomp and all what state compounds
but only painted, like his varnished friends?
Poor honest lord, brought low by his own heart,
undone by goodness.
Strange, unusual blood, when man's worst sin is
he does too much good.
Who, then, dares to be half so kind again?
For bounty, that makes gods, does still mar men.
My dearest lord, blessed, to be most accursed,
rich, only to be wretched,
thy great fortunes are made thy chief afflictions.
Alas, kind lord.
He's flung in rage
from this ingrateful seat of monstrous friends,
nor has he with him to supply his life,
or that which can command it.
I'll follow and inquire him out.
I'll ever serve his mind with my best will;
whilst I have gold, I'll be his steward still.